A Project Plan is a Project Manager's best defense
against schedule delays, budget problems,
and unfulfilled requirements.
It's a formal document that defines what a project
will deliver, and how it will be executed.
Executive management, or the client, must approve
the Project Plan before you start, ensuring that
everyone is on the same page.
While you can expand or reduce your plan, depending
on the scope of the project, it's best not to scrimp
on a document that's meant to direct your Project Team,
and ensure that all of the work gets done,
when it needs to.
Five main sections comprise a strong Project Plan.
The first section is the Project overview.
This is just as it sounds.
It's a brief description of the project, and it includes
any relevant context, such as background information,
past initiatives, or why a project was initiated.
The Project overview gives a broad snapshot
of what the project is about, and the environment
in which it operates.
After the Project overview, the second step is to describe
the project Goals and deliverables.
Goals should give team members an understanding
of the client's objectives, and criteria for successful
project completion.
Deliverables are any tangible products or outputs
of the project, such as media files, blog posts,
and product features.
Make Project Goals and deliverables as specific
and measurable as possible.
So far, you've provided an overview of the project,
along with its goals and deliverables.
The next section is the bulk of your Project Plan,
where you introduce the logistics and details.
The next section is Implementation and scheduling.
It includes a process and work flow
for executing the project.
Define what tasks are necessary to achieve project goals
and group them into key milestones or phases.
Assign an individual team member
to take ownership of each task.
This is the person responsible for its completion.
Set deadlines, give specific due dates for individual tasks
and milestones, and organize all of this information
into a schedule that's visual and easy for the team
to see their responsibilities and deadlines.
The third section is Resource requirements.
Identify the resources you need to complete a project,
including time, people, budget and equipment or technology.
Where and how will you obtain these resources?
How will you distribute them across project phases?
The last section is Risk management and communication.
First, what are the potential risks, or a threat,
to the successful completion of the project?
Is it possible that you'll experience issues
with staffing, funding or supplies?
Identify the risks and define strategies
for mitigating them.
And second, what is your communication plan?
How will critical project information be delivered,
and at what frequency.
Setting clear, effective and open lines of communication
encourages your team to speak up when there's a problem,
and address it right away.
All together, these sections will help you create a plan
that is specific, actionable, and proactive.
Expect to do some research, and interview the client,
or key stakeholders, to gather the information
you need, but also remember that, no matter how thorough
your planning, plans can always change.
A Project Plan is not a fixed document to set aside
after it's approved.
Think of it as a living, breathing thing.
Adapt and update your project as needed
to achieve the best results.